In this code challenge, you will extend your knowledge of replacing activations in the model with other
values.
After having gone through the previous and this videos, you will have all the knowledge you need to
complete the rest of the course.
You're also going to see some of the impacts of changing one layer on later layers.
Now, of course, that's not surprising when you manipulate the activations that impacts downstream
layers, but it's pretty neat to see, and it will be a nice segue into the rest of the lectures in
the next few sections.
There are four exercises in this code challenge in total, and after going through the final exercise,
I'm also going to have a little bonus section where I will explain in a little bit more detail about
one of the differences between hooking inside a transformer block Versus hooking outside of a transformer
block.
The goal of exercise one is to find the third attention head in the k activations matrix of one layer,
and zero out all of those activations.
You can start by importing GPT two small and tokenize some text.
You can write this sentence and then break it up into tokens and print out this table that you see here.
I wonder how many tokens are in pomegranate.
I do not know the answer, which is why I used this text as a prompt.
It turns out that pomegranate is four tokens in the GPT two tokenizer.
Anyway, then you will need to do some indexing, maybe some splitting, to find the indices at which
the third attention head starts and stops in the qqv matrix.
Then write a hook function where you replace those activation values with zeros.
There are actually multiple ways that you can correctly solve this, and you can check the demos from
the previous video if you need some inspiration.
You can pick one token and one layer to zero out, and when your code is ready, you can confirm that
you have indexed attention had three correctly.
By making sure you understand and match these numbers, and then you can visualize the activations like
this.
So here we see the activations for the three attention matrices from the fourth transformer block.
So index three and the activations to one of the tokens in the sentence here in green are the activations.
And you can see that one of the heads here is zeroed out.
Of course, to make this plot in the first place, you will also need to store the activations during
the forward pass and not only manipulate them.
The final thing to do in this exercise is remove the hook, and that's because we're going to use the
same model in the next couple of exercises.
But we do not want to keep this hook attached to the model.
Okay.
So now you can pause the video and hook away.
And as I mentioned there are several correct ways that you can solve this exercise.
I'm now going to switch to code and show you how I solved it, but as long as you get the right answer,
it does not matter what your solution looks like.
Import some libraries and also the GPT two model.
Okay, so here is here are the tokens that I'm printing out.
And here I'm creating some useful variables.
So we need to know the number of heads the number of embeddings, dimension and the dimension per head.
And remember from way earlier in the course that the number, the the dimensionality of the heads corresponds
to the embeddings dimensionality divided by the number of heads and two slashes.
Because I want this to be an integer and not a floating point number.
Okay, so obviously all of these variables are in the model anyway, but uh, setting them to be shorter
variable names is just convenient.
So we want to find the indices of the third head.
So head with index number two.
So the starting point of that is the head that we want to index times the head dimensionality.
And once we get the start we know exactly where the end is because it just has to be uh 64 elements
after that.
Okay.
So that's how we print out this message over here.
Now, this would be, a valid indexing for each of the three attention matrices.
So in Q versus k versus V, if you keep all of the three matrices concatenated together, then you would
actually need to incorporate that into here.
So let me just skip down here to make sure this is clear.
So what I'm doing here in the hook function is grabbing the output of this layer, splitting it into
these separate q and v matrices making a copy of k.
And then here I am modifying k and then concatenating it back along with q and v, caching it, and
then returning that so that this overwrites the output variable so that this becomes the new version
of the qkv tensor that PyTorch will continue processing.
To adjust the embeddings vectors at the end of the attention layer.
Okay.
So so basically I've separated out Q.
So these indices are sorry k I separated out k.
So therefore these indices work assuming that index zero.
Here is the beginning of k.
If you do not split these instead you use the demo.
I think it was demo two in the previous video where I just modify this output tensor directly.
Then what you would need to do is change the indexing.
Uh, where are we change the indexing here so that in order to get to K you would have to add n dot
embed plus this.
And then you would find that the index into the third attention head in k is goes from 896 to 959.
I hope that's clear.
So if you have q before K, then you need to index over all of Q in order to get to the beginning of
K.
Let me undo all of that and rerun that code.
But if you are separating out k from the Q and V matrices then you can index like this.
Okay.
So I explain all this because yeah there's multiple correct ways that you can solve this exercise.
As long as you're getting it to work it's all fine.
Okay.
So then yeah implanting the hook over here and then here I'm pushing some tokens through the model.
I suppose technically I really should be doing with torch dot grad and then like this, but yeah, because
in this video and these exercises, we're not really doing anything important with the model.
We're just confirming that we know how to use these hooks.
Then it really doesn't matter.
I think I just got lazy writing out that extra code.
Okay, so here we see the Q vectors.
So I have plotted them separately in this kind of bluish color.
And then here is for the k vectors.
And here you see that they are zeros over here in the third head.
And then for the V and you see the variability is much smaller in V and then bigger in q and much larger
in k.
This is a discovery that we made earlier in the course.
And now you see it again here as well.
And then finally I will remove the hook from the model because.
Yeah because I want to change it for the next exercise.
Now for exercise two.
There are two parts to this exercise.
One part is purely about code, and one is more theoretical and requires some critical thinking.
So here we will focus on changing the MLP Neurons from one transformer block.
So you will need to write a new hook function.
And in that function find the even indexed MLP expansion neurons and replace their activation values
with Gaussian random noise with a mean of ten.
Now when I say even indexed neurons, I mean neuron index zero, 246, and so on.
After implanting your hook, you can do another forward pass like in the previous exercise, and then
you can make a plot that looks like this.
So that is the first part of this exercise.
Now to be clear, this is an extremely bizarre and probably not very wise thing to do in real mcinturff
research.
And why is it not a good idea to replace half of the MLP neurons with Gaussian noise that has a mean
of ten?
I want you to think of an answer.
That's the second part of this exercise.
You have to think about why this is not a good manipulation to perform when you are trying to causally
understand lhe mechanisms.
Of course, I will discuss the answer to this question when I switch to code.
But first you should pause the video and work through this exercise on your own.
For this exercise, we do not need to implant the hooks into all of the layers.
So therefore I have simplified the code a bit by only writing the hook function without that outer function
that would implant the hook dynamically for each layer.
Okay.
And then here what I'm doing is making a copy here of that output, which is the all of the MLP activations.
And here you see it's MLP and C FC.
So the fully connected layer that is the expansion layer.
And here I'm generating some noise of the same size as what I want to replace.
And then I'm just adding ten.
So this is normally distributed random numbers.
So Gaussian noise with a mean of ten.
So I'm just shifting the entire noise distribution up by ten units.
And then I'm replacing those values with noise.
And then storing those activations in planting the hook with an output handle into a layered uh the
six layer.
So layer index five.
Again lots of hard coding here, but that's fine.
The goal here is to understand how to hook and work with these, uh, hook functions and not really
to do some, like, really clever, uh, dynamic experiment.
Okay, so then I push the tokens through the model and make a visualization.
And that's what you see here.
So you can see that the, uh MLP neuron On activations on their own.
These are all the odd numbered neurons that we have not manipulated.
Those are generally in the range of -2.5 to 0.
So there's a slight negative shift.
You've seen that before.
That's because after these activations are calculated, they get passed through a jlu function which
basically just clamps or at least strongly attenuates all of these negative activation values, which
makes the model be much more sparse in the MLP layer.
So these are the activation values that the model naturally calculates on its own during processing.
And these are the ridiculously large weights that or activation values that I have artificially imposed
from the hook.
Now, why is this not a really wise thing to do in real experiments?
Notice that the distribution of these, even numbered activations are so completely different they literally
do not overlap by a single point.
So the distribution is so far shifted to the right that it.
Who knows what this is going to do to the model, but it's not going to be anything that's, um, very
insightful in the sense of being able to make inferences and understanding about mechanisms in the model.
Instead, this is really just going to to add a ton of like out of distribution noise to the model.
So scientifically speaking, this is not really a great thing to do.
But in terms of education and learning and seeing that this really has an impact, then this is fantastic
because it's so clear that we've really manipulated the model here.
Okay.
And then I will remove that hook.
So we are ready for exercise three.
Now for exercise three.
This and the next exercises will be a nice segue into the next section of the course, where you will
learn about manipulating the hidden state activations, and by this term, hidden state, I'm referring
to the output of the entire transformer block.
So this is not the adjustments that are made by the attention or the MLP layers, but the final output
of the transformer block which provides the input into the subsequent transformer block.
I'm calling them hidden state activations because that is what Huggingface calls them.
For example, when you are requesting the hidden state activations to be outputted in a forward pass.
Now, the thing that you need to know about hooking and manipulating the transformer output is that
the variable output in the hook function, which we've been using so far.
In this case, it's a tuple and not a tensor.
So that requires a little bit of additional code.
And it can be a little tricky.
So if this is your first time hooking the transformer outputs then you might find this exercise to be
weird.
You might find some errors that you didn't expect, but therefore it's also a really great learning
opportunity.
Anyway, your hook function should look something like this.
You want to get all of the hidden states, and then scale them by some variable that you define outside
of the hook.
You want to define that variable globally so outside the hook function, because you're going to manipulate
this variable here without changing the hook function.
In exercise four again keep in mind that the variable here output.
This is not a tensor like the what you were working with in the previous couple of exercises.
Instead, this is a tuple in which the first element is the tensor that you want.
Now, while developing this code, I recommend including some print statements in here to look at data
types and variable sizes.
Also notice that I'm not storing any activations in this hook function.
Instead, we're going to grab the activations during the forward pass using the output.
Hidden states equals true input when you call the model.
Once you have written a correct hook, you can do a forward pass and get the hidden states.
Of course, you will find 13 hidden states, and the size of one of those is one by 12 by 768 for 12
tokens in that sentence about pomegranates.
Now that you have the hidden states, you can isolate the activations vector for one of these tokens.
Doesn't really matter which token you look at, you just pick one and then you visualize it like this.
Both of these panels, both of these axes, show a scatter plot of activations from all the layers on
the x axis, from one token in the sentence, which you can pick.
And then each little box.
Here is the activation from one embeddings dimension in this transformer block.
So this shows all of the activations for all of the hidden state dimensions here.
And then on the right I'm showing the norm of each activations vector.
We have worked with vector norms before.
It's just the square root of the sum of all of these squared vector elements.
You can also calculate it using, for example, the numpy linear norm function.
And basically the norm just tells you how big are all the elements in the vector.
So it will be interesting to see what happens at the layer that you manipulate, and also the layers
before.
And of course, it will be super interesting to see what happens in these subsequent layers.
The last thing I want to mention here is you should not remove the hook at the end of this exercise.
In the previous two exercises, I told you to remove the hook, but that's because the following exercise
used a different hook.
However, we are going to use this same hook function in exercise four, so you don't need to remove
the hook here.
Okay.
So now you can pause the video and get to work.
And now I will switch to code.
Here you can see that I am not just working with the output variable as we have done before.
Instead I'm indexing the first element.
And that is because this is a tuple.
If you want to confirm that, you can write something like print type output, and then when you run
this hook, you will see the type being.
In fact, let me even just do this now.
So here we see.
So this right here class tuple.
This comes from this line of code here because I have uh yeah.
Every time we run this hook in the forward pass then this line of code is going to run.
So that's not something you want to do if you're writing out a ton of code, like running lots of experiments
and so on.
But for working through your code and trying to understand what's going on inside the hook function,
this is great.
Okay, so I get out the first element, and that turns out to be the actual output of the transformer
block.
And that's what we want to modify.
And then I'm using this method on a PyTorch tensor called dot mul.
This is a Multiplication.
And then I'm just multiplying by this scaling factor, which I define outside the hook, so that later
on I can change this value and then just run the forward pass again.
Now this is a tensor.
This variable starts out as a tensor.
So we need to export a tensor.
If you would just output something like this then this is going to cause errors because PyTorch will
expect a tuple here.
And we are only outputting here a tensor which is the first element of the tuple.
So I'm just packing it back up again.
So here we go.
So the first element of the tuple and then all the other elements of the tuple those are concatenated.
And then I'm using parentheses here to package it into a tuple.
I will show you also in the next section multiple other ways of packing this up or at least one other
way.
Okay.
So that is for this.
I've already run this.
Yeah.
And here we see there are 13 hidden states, and the size of each one is one sentence, 12 tokens and
768 embeddings dimensions.
Okay.
So now what I'm doing here is basically just some quick and dirty analyses.
So I'm grabbing the hidden states for this sentence.
I just picked token four at random.
All of the embeddings dimension.
Detach that from the computational graph and the gradient information and so on, and convert it into
numpy.
And then here I'm plotting all of the data.
So all of the embeddings vectors values from this particular block.
And then I take numpy dot linalg dot norm.
Again this just tells me about like the size of the matrix.
So here you see.
And let me also go back just to show you that what I changed here or where I implanted this, uh, downscaling
hook is into number eight, which corresponds to the ninth transformer block.
Okay, so let's keep that in mind.
The ninth transformer block is what got scaled down.
And now here we see that the variability of the activation.
So the distribution is increasing as we get deeper into the model.
This is something we have discovered several times before in the previous sections of the course.
But now it all gets clamped down.
And also remember that the very first element here of the hidden state from the output of running through
the model forward pass is the embeddings layer.
So this is the embeddings layer.
This is transformer block 012345678.
So there you go.
A little bit confusing with the indexing but that's how it is.
Okay.
And then yeah they start expanding again after that.
And here you see the norms of the vectors.
They are increasing slowly but steadily.
and then it drops down because I've clamped down all of the values, or I've reduced all the values,
I've scaled them down by a factor of 90%.
So there are only 0.1 of their regular values, and then they start going back up.
Exercise four is extremely simple in terms of code, so it's just something interesting to look at and
think about.
All you need to do is copy the code from exercise three, but scale by a factor of ten instead of scaling
down by 0.1.
The visualizations here are identical same tokens, same everything.
You're just inflating all the values instead of deflating them.
Of course, you do not need to create a new hook function.
You just change the global variable parameter that defines how much scaling there is.
And I think you're going to find that something interesting happens at the final layer of the model.
Anyway, that is for exercise four.
I will switch to code in a moment and show my solution and discuss the results.
And then I will also show you some bonus code that is not part of the exercise, but helps explain why
the output variable of the transformer block is a tuple and not just the tensor, which is how it works
for hooking inside the transformer block.
Anyway, I'll get to that in a moment.
And now you should switch to code.
So the code here for exercise four is super simple.
I literally copy pasted everything from exercise three, not the hook function.
We don't need to recreate that.
And all I did was change this variable scaling factors.
So when we look back up here we can see scaling factor and scaling factor inside the hook function.
Okay.
So now I will just rerun all of that code.
Okay, we still get the print out that it's a tuple.
And now here again you see a little bit of an expansion of the activations, the variability in the
activations of these embeddings vectors as we go deeper into the model.
Here is where it absolutely blows up.
And why does it blow up here?
I scale everything by a factor of ten.
It continues to increase, right.
So it's actually getting bigger and bigger as it gets deeper into the model until we get to the very
last layer here.
So the very end of the transformer sweep right before we get into the embeddings matrix.
And that's where we see this compression again.
And that you see really clearly here in this plot of the vector norms.
So what's happening here is that the final layer is compensating a little bit for the manipulation.
These values are really large.
And this layer is just able to compensate to some extent for that manipulation.
That's an interesting observation.
We will actually follow up on this.
We're going to continue observing this kind of phenomenon in the next section when we keep working on
manipulating hidden state activations.
Okay.
So that is the end of this exercise.
I'm going to remove this hook because here I want to create a new hook.
And in this hook what I want to do is just print out I'm not actually manipulating anything.
I'm not storing anything.
I'm not overwriting anything.
All I'm doing is printing out the output type and the number of elements in this tuple here.
And then I am looping through all of the elements in the tuple and just printing out the size of that
and putting it in some block.
That part doesn't matter, but this part does matter.
This is not going in a sublayer of the transformer.
So attention or MLP or any of the branches out from attention or MLP.
Instead, I'm attaching this directly to the entire transformer, which means it's the output from the
entire transformer block.
Okay, so run this and here is some text here.
I also just wanted to show you what these outputs look like when you use multiple texts in a batch with
padding okay.
So I was not very clever when I came up with these.
I just wanted a couple of sequences that have different token lengths so that they are padded.
Okay.
So here you see the tokens.
Nothing new here.
Here we see the model.
And we're basically just looking for the print out here.
So the output the variable output is a tuple.
And it has one element and element zero.
So that is the first element is three by nine by 768 three sentences in this batch three sequences Nine
tokens per sequence and 768 embeddings dimensions.
Okay, so we see basically that this variable here only has exactly one element, which is the tensors
that we want to manipulate.
So why do this?
Why does this need to be a tuple with one element.
Why not just make this be the tensor itself, just like how it was when we were working with the attention
and the MLP uh, activations?
The answer is that, uh, in these hugging face style models, they are actually a little bit more flexible
to incorporate multiple different matrices, multiple different pieces of information into the output
package.
So what I'm doing here is saying, uh, output hidden states equals true.
Uh, now that, you know, we often do that by, um, putting it inside the call to the model like this.
But you can also just directly modify the config file.
So I'm outputting the hidden states that you've seen before.
But here I'm outputting the attention vectors.
So I also set that to be true.
It turns out, by the way, that this does not work with the optimized scalar dot product attention
function.
So instead we need to change the implementation of attention.
This is slightly less or can potentially be slightly less efficient depending on what kind of processor
you're accessing and so on.
But it does allow us to output the activations directly from attention.
So we see it's still a tuple, but now we have two elements in that tuple.
The first element is still the output of the transformer block.
But now the second element is something different that has size three by 12 by nine by nine.
So this corresponds to the three sequences.
And now this is the 12 attention heads and nine by nine for the size of the tokens.
Okay.
I in general do not really recommend trying to get the output of the attention block using this method.
In my humble opinion, I think it's much better to get this using hooks so you can access them directly.
But I just wanted to show you that the reason why this variable here is a tuple is that there are situations
where it needs to contain more pieces of information than just the output tensor.
I hope you didn't find this code challenge too challenging.
You are now ready to start learning about experiments in causal mcinturff, where you will start learning
about how to measure the impact of these activation manipulations, both on the LM behavior and on the
internal dynamics.